DA employee, an agronomist, senior agronomist, but he also was a full professor in the A&M system.
So he held a post in the university.
And we had people like those at Greenville, folks in Big Spring, folks in Lubbock.
people in El Paso who were federal employees.
We worked with them without ever recognizing who paid their salary.
Now, your salary was during those 50s and 60s was paid entirely by the university or was it partly federal?
No, altogether experiment station.
Later years, we were required to do some teaching.
certainly expected to.
And I picked up some graduate teaching somewhere along around 1970.
I taught a course in, graduate course in plant breeding for a while.
Later I joined with a couple of colleagues and we team taught a course, a man out of plant pathology, man out of entomology and me.
And we would partition this course, and we'd each teach it about six or eight weeks.
A very successful course.
And do you remember the name of it?
Host Plant Resistance.
In those days, that was a buzzword.
particularly in cotton and a few other crops, that really was the advent of integrated pest management, which was a very popular concept because it had some very strong apostles.
It also had lots of money.
So we got into that very heavily here and in other places.
That's where I really began to work with the entomologists.
Perry Atkinson in particular, beginning about 1957 or 58 when Perry came here from Arkansas.
Describe young Perry Atkinson when you first met him.
Young Perry Atkinson, when I first met him, was trying to get his feet wet.
He had certain interests and a very knowledgeable, he was knowledgeable, had a good expertise in insect management, cotton insects.
Was he kind of shy, kind of reserved?
Yeah, yes.
Perry was not a very outgoing person.
Let me put it that way.
Perry still is not a very outgoing person.
I talked with him this morning about 6 o'clock at the gym.
Perry's like Perry has always been, even when we traveled together quite a bit.
He was not the life of the party.
That was his nature.
I don't mean he was a recluse or anything like that.
Perry's rather reserved, and he probably was smart enough to observe a lot of things when the rest of us were flapping our mouth.
Now, his, was there any particular parasites he was working on?
Yes.
Perry really developed his reputation working on the cotton bulwyrm.
That's what I thought.
And that's where I first got acquainted with him because he came over and I helped him, as I remember, picking out some germplasm, some cotton stalks, exotic things that he could use in his research studies.
That's where I got acquainted with Perry.
Later on, I was fortunate to get tied up not only with Perry but with Knox Walker.
Knox was maybe the premier cotton bow research, cotton bow weevil research man, certainly in Texas, maybe in the U.S.
And I worked with Knox very closely for probably 12, 15 years in developing management programs for both the bow worm, flea hopper, and the bow weevil.
All of that was an integrated program involved engineers and agronomists, entomologists, whatnot.
Another person I was fortunate to work with a good bit was Lambert Wilkes in ag engineering.
We did some fairly pioneering study in mechanical harvesting of cotton.
Now, Wayne Hall.
Wayne Hall I first knew as a prof. I took a course in plant growth regulators from Wayne Hall.
Oh, describe that.
Describe him as a graduate instructor.
He was a toughie.
Wayne was a toughie.
And he was demanding.
Very fair.
A good instructor.
Well prepared?
Well prepared.
Oh, yeah.
But that was often a little chemistry, and chemistry was never one of my strengths.
And that's where I first knew Wayne Hall.
Because wasn't he a pioneer in defoliation?
Yes.
Yeah.
And we worked with him some, in a minor way, over the years.
Being in the applied end of the cotton business, we
had some working relationships with physiologists, entomologists, pathologists, engineers, biochemists, people over in what was then the Cottonseed Products Laboratory, Cecil Womble.
It really was a fantastic career because it was not closed.
I had contacts
with many, many other disciplines.
That was the joy in the work that I did.
This is an editorial note about Dr. Wayne C. Hall.
In the interview with him, I learned from him that he had never seen a cotton plant until he moved to Texas except for two or three that he saw growing in the greenhouse laboratory at the University of Kentucky while he was on the faculty there.
But then after he got here, he did some very, very important work on cotton defoliation and new methods of, that made new methods of harvesting cotton possible.
As you were doing your work, did it matter whether someone was funded by the federal government, the state government, the university, the experiment station, or a private corporation?
No.
That was one of the joys of working in those days, that people just worked together as a team.
It didn't make much difference who paid the bill.
And just about everybody was on 12 months in those days.
Yes.
And certainly in research and extension, yeah.
And did you do any of your, those first years of research, did you do any around the state or was most of it at first here?
For the first three, four years was here.
After I took on the variety evaluation work, immediately the travel thing grew.
What was your first research accomplishment that led you to believe that you were on the right track and led the leaders of the department that they had made a good choice?
What?
The first, I didn't think it was terribly important at the time, but I can remember Richmond making quite a deal out of it.
I might say pioneered the use of data processing in the analysis summarizing of variety test data with Brad Lisenby and Bob Smith
who at that time had a data processing center in the basement floor of the system administration building.
What kind of machinery was in use for data processing then?
Oh, they were great big monster looking things, what they had.
Was IBM key punch?
Yeah, everything was card punched in, read onto cards and then run through
all of those mysterious machines.
And I can almost recall clearly the first year that I put out a test bulletin with data, utilizing data that had been through the DPC at that time.
That was a new thing.
The second piece of work that I really enjoyed, mechanical harvesting was really coming into its
into its own in the 50s, late 50s particularly.
Hand harvesting was a thing of the past.
Traditional cotton varieties grown for machine picking, not stripping, machine picking, were what we call open bowl varieties, in which the seed cotton was held in such a way that it could be easily extracted by hand.
With machine harvesting, that crop had to send there for an extended period of time until, let's say it was two-thirds open and mature.
Then you'd come in with a machine.
So the crop needed some protection from the elements simply to reduce weather loss, pre-harvest loss as we considered it.
And I can recall talking to Richmond about we need to develop some types that would
Provide some protection from the elements and still be suitable for machine harvesting.
That was my baby.
And I went out and everything I could put my hands on and made hundreds of plant selections of plants in which the seed cotton was held more tightly in the burr.
That was the beginning of what I called my storm resistance breeding program.
And that's where I got tied up with engineers in machine harvesting.
That was about when?
Early 70s?
19, 1656.
That really came into its own in the 60s and really hit well around 1970, early 70s.
By then it was being picked up.
We were producing what we called breeding, primary breeding stocks.
It was emphasized to me by Dr. Richmond.
My job was not to produce commercial varieties.
If that happened, that was sort of incidental.
But rather to try and develop characteristics, plant characteristics, in stable breeding material that could be given to
Mr. Lankard or anybody else who wanted to use them for development of commercial cultivars.
So we developed a series of storm resistant breeding stocks which were later fed out into numerous commercial breeders for integration into their variety development programs.
That probably was the first real
tangible thing I could put my finger on.
Do you remember any time when a dean or a department head or something really patted you on the back and you thought, okay, I've succeeded when that happened first?
Well, many people didn't pay much attention to us.
It was rare for an administrator to come to the field.
Jarvis Miller was one of the first ones.
Quite frankly.
When you, who was the director of the experiment station in the 60s?
R.D.
Lewis.
Oh, yes, yes.
Describe Dr. Lewis.
He was kind of a contradiction.
He was a rather forceful man.
Somewhat demanding.
I had no problems with him at all.
When I first knew him, I was a bit intimidated by him.
I learned later that he, that was a bit of a facade.
So that was the man I initially worked under as a director was, was R.D.
Lewis.
Because now he was, he grew up out of state.
He was Ohio, if I remember right.
See, I served with him on that aspirations committee.
Yeah.
And he was one of the very positive voices looking to the future of what A&M could become.
He was good.
You bet.
He had a good vision.
And did he, was it normal for him to listen to new ideas?
I'd say yes.
Did he have, as far as you know, did he have any pet peeves or any blind spots?
His pet peeves, I thought, always thought, were people who didn't.
How do I phrase this?
He sort of had an idea of how you were to behave as a professional and what your responsibilities were to the organization.
I remember how he expected everybody to come to the Experiment Station staff meetings, and he didn't take it kindly.
If you didn't show up, I know from personal experience.
And how was a professional to be dressed at one of those meetings?
Well, I don't know that he ever mandated, but you just knew.
that you didn't come in there in your grody's.
He himself projected an image of propriety, and it sort of slopped back onto us.
It put us on our good behavior, I thought, both in our looks and our behavior.
Did he or any other key person have any, instead of pet peeves, any pet preferences?
things that you're deeply interested in, where if you were going to do this kind of research, you knew it would be easier to get support.
I can't think of anything like that.
One of the, and I think Lewis had a lot to do with this, the development of such a comprehensive cotton research program at Texas A&M University.
He supported it very strongly with people like Richmond,
Maida Brown, Margaret Menzel, Charlie Lewis, and all of the others in the system.
And Dr. Lewis supported that, encouraged that.
What other important crop products were there important research done on?
Corn?
Corn, grain sorghum, certainly.
especially through the work of Carper and Quimby in Chillicothe and later on up in Lubbock, some of those folks.
Let's say cotton, grain sorghum, corn.
Maize.
Yeah, maize.
And what my grandparents call high gear.
High gear, yeah, grain sorghum.
Yeah, that's what they call it here is high gear.
Yeah.
Everybody calls it high gear.
There was a good bit of pioneering work done, I think, in those days in crops like soybeans, castor beans, sunflowers, some of the minor crops.
Murray Kinman was a USDA employee who had the castor bean program, for instance.
In hindsight, were there any omissions?
As I look at it now,
No, because we had, I thought, a full complement of professional programs.
Big programs, small grains.
I. M. Atkins, who was really almost a giant in that, you know.
Johnny Rogers in corn.
Is that the John Rogers I see at church every Sunday?
Yes.
I did, had a good interview with him.
Yeah.
Great individual.
Good scientist.
Fine man.
Good administrator.
Yeah.
Now, when you completed your dissertation, that was what year?
59.
Did that make any obvious change in your status or?
I think I was made an associate professor shortly after that.
And your research stayed at the same pace.
It grew gradually and shifted a little through time.
We began somewhat by default to de-emphasize the basic research in cytology, cytogenetics and genetics, partly because of funding, partly because of competition for money and
All of these programs go through phases, it seems.
You get an emphasis on genetics.
Then that begins to fade after a while, and they want to do applied research.
And then they decide applied research is not good enough.
We go into something else.
Probably the biggest thing I ever got into was disintegrated pest management.
Disintegrated?
Integrated pest management.
Oh, integrated.
Yeah.
Integrated.
Because that became a buzzword.
Because of the chemical, the pollutant thing, the cost, the inherent dangers and all of that, chemical use and so forth.
So there were some disciples in this country that really pushed that, and they were very effective at it.
Barry Atkinson was one of them, a major player in that.
And we had a consortium.
When did that- Mind you.
In your- That goes back into the seventies.
Yeah.
Did anyone tell you to make that shift or did you- No.
It just sort of grew.
From my contacts that I already had with people like Knox Walker and Perry
and Luther Byrd and others.
It just seemed the natural thing to do.
Were all of them in agronomy?
No.
Byrd was over in pathology.
Walker was in entomology.
Lambert Wilkes over in ag engineering.
Some of the same individuals.
We just changed our focus a little bit and what we emphasized.
In all the years that you've worked here,
Was it comparatively easy, was it normal that there be people from a number of departments working together?
Was there any department that was less cooperative or least cooperative?
No.
No, I would not say that there was.
Oh, good, good.
I can't recall ever having someone turn me down.
Now, your funding was from?
Funding was, well, initially we had a good bit of hatch money, or what they call regional research money, experiment station money.
We had good funds early in the 50s.
Those became a little tougher to get up into the 60s.
Particularly the federal funds became much more restrictive.
Then we started playing the grant, the contract grant thing.
And that's where a lot of our later money came from.
Explain, describe that.
Well, things like Cotton Incorporated.
That's when the cotton industry decided they had
to start building their own program of funding.
So, we got good funding out of Cotton Incorporated.
Then there was an organization called the Natural Fibers Commission of Texas.
It was organized over as a market, or as an economics project at the University of Texas.
But later, there was a
a central organization for that that was managed by a fellow named Carl Cox, was the one that I knew the best.
And they had monies.
And we lived off some of that.
Some of that money is still in the program here now.
So in the later years, we had a major portion of our money came from grants and contracts.
And so you had to work on those sometimes every year?
Yeah.
Sometimes you'd get a grant maybe for three years, which was great.
The ones that were given to you on a yearly basis were really a pain.
You spent too much time doing paperwork, see.
And, of course, there was a bleed off.
If you got $50,000, somebody upstairs took off about 30 or 40 percent of that, see.
give some sample experiences of trying to renew those grants, where you went to somewhere and tried to make a presentation, and positive, negative, or goofy.
Probably the one that was the toughest to handle was the Consortium for Integrated Pest Management, because that involved numerous disciplines.
It involved, I think, five universities.
So there was a lot of competition for that money.
And we used to have to prepare reports.
And we would have seminars.
And you had to sell your program and its potential.
And they could be pretty cutthroat when they had to be.
A person like Perry Atkinson could see through weaknesses in programs quite easily.
And he was a major player in that.
That was the toughest one to do.
The Cotton Incorporated was influenced too much by politics, I think.
State politics, national politics?
National politics.
This state, this state, that sort of thing.
So in a sense, you had to compete with co-workers for interest and for support.
But I can't criticize all that because it kept us going very well.
At the local level, who were some of the outstanding allies that y'all had to keep this money flowing?
You mean organizations or people?
People.
Perry Atkinson, obviously, is one of them.
Carl Cox with natural fibers, food protein.
And, of course, the Experiment Station Director was very influential in that, whoever that might be.
Jarvis was good.
All right.
Now, Jarvis followed?
Lewis.
He followed R.D.
Yes.
Okay.
And you described Dr. Lewis a bit.
Describe Jarvis as the Experiment Station Director.
I'm biased because I really
had a good rapport, personal rapport with Jarvis.
That's fine.
I can recall him telling me one time, Albie, if you ever want to talk to me, come on down here.
If I'm around, come in, sit down, we'll talk about whatever you want to talk about.
Where was his office?
Down in the system building.
One of the...
One thing that interested Jarvis, as I recall, he had been overseas in the Dominican for some time.
Jarvis was a strong proponent of international work.
And he encouraged me in that and allowed me to do a fair amount of that while he was in office.
And so did others.
And that was one of the nicest part of my
job, my career, the last 20 years, 15 to 20 years, I did a good bit of international travel and working with people internationally.
Right.
Now, he became the director in the early 70s?
He became the director.
That would have to be in, yeah, I'd say somewhere, yeah.
Yeah, because he was, mm-hmm.
And his family, I know, had big farming acreage.
Did they, had they grown cotton?
I don't recall.
It was down toward Victoria, Orange Grove.
Down toward Victoria, somewhere down in there.
Yeah, and I don't know whether they grew cotton or not, but I'd be surprised.
Probably.
I bet they did.
Because there was good cotton country down in there.
So he seemed to understand thoroughly.
Jarvis had a working man's feel, I thought, for agriculture.
And I contrast that with a little more.
esoteric look at the thing that some folks might bring in.
Folks like Clark.
Good administrators.
Neville Clark.
Good administrators, but tough.
Did he follow Jarvis?
I think so.
I think that's right.
Yeah.
So I remember when he came.
I'd see Jarvis move on up.
See, we had an international programs
international office here for a long time.
And they helped a great deal.
See, Bloodworth ultimately went over there, out of our department.
And of course, he helped a lot when he was in there.
He didn't hurt me.
I could travel easily.
But we worked a lot with folks in Mexico, Argentina, Israel.
All on cotton?
Yeah, we had contact with them.
We used to exchange data, exchange seed stocks, and they'd come to visit all the time.
The Israelis grew cotton?
Oh, yeah.
I didn't know that.
I was amazed when I went over there.
Some of the finest cotton I ever saw in my life.
I didn't know they had the spice.
Oh.
Their agriculture blew me.
Yeah.
Did any of the Arab nations?
to grow cotton?
Egypt, Pakistan, India, Iraq, Iran.
All of those had cotton to some fairly important crops.
South Africa, that's where I really got my foot into the African thing.
And we had people who came here because of our reputation as a cotton center here.
We drew
a lot of international students and a lot of international visitors.
And our people, Richmond and Maida Brown, for instance, had international.
They spent quite a bit of time in Europe and Africa invited as visiting scientists.
So we had a reputation at that time in the 50s and early 60s.
As your work broadened your research,
You as a professional remain primarily a research professional, not a teaching professional.
That's right.
What were the basic satisfactions, the fun, the joy, the reasons to celebrate for a researcher?
If I look back on it in retrospect, I would make one claim.
I, along with some of my
colleagues in those years experienced the golden years of agricultural search at Texas A&M University.
Now the things that really gave me a great deal of pleasure were graduate students, working with them and seeing them develop an expertise which later
came to fruition in their own programs.
They became major players in their companies and in their countries.
I have several of those.
Describe as many of those as you want to.
Oh, I have a couple of them in Mexico who were very good friends.
We had a couple came here one time, knocked on the door one night.
We opened the door and there was a man, his wife,